1. Arjun and the Bird’s Eye Test
The Kauravas and the Pandavas were given an archery test by their Guru, Dronacharya. They were asked to aim at the eye of a toy bird on the branch of a tree. When the teacher asked them what they saw, with the exception of Arjun, all others claimed to see the sky, trees, the bird, the leaves, the branches, etc. Only Arjun said that he just saw the blackness of the bird’s eye. Only he was permitted to shoot at the target, which he did successfully.

2. Abhimanyu and the Chakravyuh
Abhimanyu, while in his mother’s womb, had learned how to break the Chakravyuh, an intricate battle formation. On the thirteenth day of the great battle, the sixteen-year-old youth fought bravely against the experienced, much older warriors and reached the centre of the circular formation where Duryodhana was. The Kauravas rushed to save Duryodhana and attacked Abhimanyu. Unfortunately, Abhimanyu had not learned how to exit the formation. He put up a great fight and killed many great warriors before he himself was killed.

3. Eklavya and Dronacharya
Eklavya, a tribal boy was refused to be taken as a disciple to learn archery by Guru Dronacharya who taught only the Kshatriyas and the Brahmins. Undeterred, he kept a clay image of Dronacharya before him and practised archery becoming very proficient in it. Once, disturbed by the barking of a dog, he shot arrows in its mouth to shut it up without hurting it. When this feat came into the notice of Arjun, he was upset that there was a better archer than he was. Not wanting to have a rival archer against Arjuna and observing that Eklavya had his image as the teacher, Dronacharya asked him for Guru Dakshina, the offering to be made to the teacher. On being asked what he could offer, Dronacharya asked for his right thumb knowing well that without the thumb he could not shoot. Without hesitation, Eklavya cut his thumb with a knife and placed it at the Guru’s feet. With this deed, he immortalized himself as the epitome of an ideal student.

4. The Story of King Shibi
King Shibi was known for his truthfulness, being just, and keeping his word. The gods Agni and Indra decided to test these qualities. They assumed the forms of a dove and a hawk, the latter pursuing the former. The dove sought protection with Shibi, who promised to save him. The hawk in anger accused him of depriving him of his rightful food. The king, in reply, offered flesh from his own body to appease his hunger. The hawk asked for flesh equal to the weight of the dove. A balance was brought, and the king started cutting flesh from his body, but the dove seemed to be getting heavier with every piece. Finally, the king himself sat in the balance offering his entire body. At this, the gods came into their real forms granting him many boons and the gods above, a witness to this test, showered him with flowers and praise.

Moral Lessons for Children from Mahabharata
Be focused, and you will always succeed.
A teacher can guide you and inspire you, but practice will make you perfect.
Keep good company. Bad friends will bring about your downfall.
Respect women. The disrespect shown to women will bring disasters upon you.
Don’t indulge in vices like gambling. You will end up losing everything.
Don’t give up easily. Fight for what is rightfully yours. Truth always wins in the end.
Don’t apply half-learned knowledge to your actions. It will only lead to failure.
Don’t support the wrong acts of your close friends and relatives. It will bring trouble upon you as well.
Do not seek revenge. Vengeance spells the end for the seeker and the sought both.
War is never good. Matters can be resolved with dialogue.
